# Response to Blumenstock

## Question
Joshua Blumenstock states that a humbler data science could transform international development while also limiting the number of alleged silver bullets that have missed their mark in recent years. Describe the promise, pitfalls and ways forward Blumenstock uses as the foundation for his thesis.

## Response
Joshua Blumenstock makes a series of strong appeals for the growing role of data science in global development, outlining several benefits that investment in data will provide the world. He emphasizes the potential application of algorithms produced by global technological giants such as Google to impoverished communities around the world. His argument illustrates the potential impact of human-led data development on real-world problems. The idea of applying the algorithms of big tech companies to solve poverty is certainly very intriguing and would mark a big improvement over current data applications if practical enough to use. Blumenstock then elaborates on more specific positives that can arise is a result of data collection. He points out that governments can employ the data to focus on providing humanitarian aid to the impoverished while trying to eliminate the disproportional benefits enjoyed by the wealthy from standard interventions. However, this argument is heavily reliant on the "good intent" of government described by Anna Raymond. Governments around the world are certainly capable of using data to benefit their citizens in his view. However, the big question remains whether they will actually use it to help the poor or whether data will simply become another privilege enjoyed by the elites of society.

Blumenstock continues by describing a number of problems that may also arise from future development of big data. He makes a strong point that most existing solutions tend to benefit the better off rather than actual problems such as poverty. Misuse of the resources provided by data could prove to be serious and make data collection a major waste of money. Blumenstock wisely lays heavy emphasis on the fact that very few studies have been carried out to observe the real-world impacts of data-led programs, using the example of digital credit loans in Kenya. Furthermore, he suggests that the technology for data collection is imperfect, with current evidence showing that the accuracy of collection practices may be limited. In addition, this inaccuracy may be present in both the short run and the long run, sometimes dropping in the span of months and never recovering. Perhaps more serious problems explained by Blumenstock include algorithms that tend to favor the wealthy and control of data largely in the hands of the private sector. Each of these issues plays into the "transparency" argument aid out by Nira Nair. In order to avert these problems, data scientists need to make the process of analyzing big data more public and understandable to the general population. Doing so will likely incentivize both public and private agents to use the power of big data for the good of everyone rather than themselves.

Blumenstock concludes his argument by addressing several ways that the data community can fix the aforementioned series of problems, while further explaining the relationship between humans and the data they produce. He suggests that future advances focus on improving our current sets of data rather than creating entirely new ones, and also strongly emphasizes that data scientists collaborate with governments and the private sector to globalize their work. By working together, each group can place their own input into the process of developing data and attempt to perfect the technology as much as possible. In addition, data centralization also strengthens Blumenstock's validation argument as broader access to data for a large variety of people makes it easier for new data to complement existing sets. He concludes by listing examples of how collaboration between public and private entities has already seen success, such as in South Africa and Kenya. However, his push for a humbler data science suggests that there remains a long way to go. The progress made in Africa is just the beginning of the potential for big data to improve society.

Blumenstock builds off Kayla Seggelke's idea of a "balancing act" between promises and problems as a result of future reliance on big data. International collaboration and analysis is the best method to produce the benefits of big data while avoiding many of the issues addressed by Blumenstock. Humanity is capable of expanding data to fit their needs; the question is whether they are willing to balance the needs of the wealthy and the poor in order to help everyone.

