# Response to Jahan and Rosling
## Question
Selim Jahan introduces the idea that for far too long the paradigm of economic development has dominated the idea of human development. Jahan states that while income is critical it is not an end, and that human development is about expanding the richness of life, not the richness of the economy within which human beings live. What are some of the targetted issues that Jahan examples as requiring focus throughout the world? Elaborate further on Jahan’s definition of human development. What are the different measures incorporated into the Human Development Index that serve to capture the breadth and focus of each countries’ average achievement?

Hans Rosling states that “we underestimate the tremendous social change that often precedes economic change” and proceeds to provide several examples. What were some of the examples Rosling presented where health appeared to be a precursor to wealth? What was Rosling’s warning regarding the dangers of using averages when describing development?

## Response
Jahan relates the ideas of human and economic development by emphasizing the potential they have to affect human choices. He suggests that basic human development requires two things: improved human capabilities and improved abilities to use those capabilities. Jahan evokes Abraham Lincoln by stating that development should be "of the people, for the people, and by the people". He also states that there should not be an "end point" for development and that our expectations for developing should continue to evolve. Jahan establishes that specific issues such as minimum human welfare should be bypassed in favor of broader concepts such as choices. He further mentions the preoccupation of society with the Human Development Index, with emphasis on a person's country and their biggest competitor. Jahan highlights two major measures of the HDI: birth measures (including things such as infant mortality rate) and focus measures (concentrating on longevity, knowledge, and standards of living). However, he strongly emphasizes that no measure captures all of human development. He makes a large appeal to focus on the big picture when it comes to the broad issue of human development.

Rosling emphasizes the impact of social change on other aspects of society such as the economy through a series of real life examples. He cites the case of Vietnam, which gradually saw life expectancy increase over a long period following the Vietnam War with minimal change in economic well-being until recently. Similarly, China focused primarily on developing services such as healthcare under Mao Zedong, and their focus changed to economic growth once Deng Xiaoping took over leadership. Rosling further warns that averages are not reliable indicators of a region's actual development. He uses examples from every continent to back up his argument; for example, South Africa sits well above the African averages for life expectancy and income, while Sierra Leone is far below the standards in both categories. He concludes by advising that the averages for a region should not be the basis to develop solutions to local problems due in large part to the major differences in income and health that he previously illustrates.

Each of the two data analysts stress the importance of focusing on certain issues relating to human development within their lectures. In addition, both Jahan and Rosling warn not to rely on narrow elements of development; Jahan talks about the importance of diversifying measures used to determine levels of development, while Rosling advises to avoid reliance on averages in favor of viewing developmental data as a whole. Both send similar messages with relation to using data despite the differences in the techniques they focus on.
